Add FP8 kernel acceleration for compressed-tensors quantized models (#45699)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/quantization/compressed_tensors.md

Reviewer: should we also update this to match the `## Online FP8 quantization section` that models can be quantized on-the-fly?

Author: done.

| Device | Kernel | Notes |
|--------|--------|-------|
| Intel XPU | `torch._scaled_mm` | All XPU devices with FP8 support |
| NVIDIA CUDA (SM89+) | `torch._scaled_mm` | Ada Lovelace (L4, L40), Hopper (H100), Blackwell and newer |
| CPU / CUDA SM80 (A100) | Fallback | Dequantizes to BF16, uses standard matmul |

The FP8 kernel path supports these quantization layouts.

| Strategy | Example model |
|----------|---------------|
| Per-channel dynamic | [RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic](https://huggingface.co/RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic) |
| Per-tensor static | [RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8](https://huggingface.co/RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8) |

### Loading a pre-quantized FP8 model

Transformers activates the FP8 kernel path automatically when the model's config specifies FP8 quantization and a supported GPU is available.

```python
import torch
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    "RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic",
    device_map="auto",

>     dtype=torch.bfloat16,

Reviewer 2: why dtype bf16 with an fp8 model ? should work with default auto

Author: Done.

# 8.4575 GB
```

## FP8 kernel acceleration

> When an FP8 compressed-tensors model is loaded on a supported GPU, transformers automatically uses hardware-accelerated FP8 matmul kernels (`torch._scaled_mm`) instead of dequantizing weights back to BF16. This keeps weights in FP8 format throughout inference for lower memory usage and faster computation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transformers automatically uses hardware-accelerated FP8 matmul kernels (`torch._scaled_mm`) when you load an FP8 compressed-tensors model on a supported GPU, instead of dequantizing weights back to BF16. Keeping weights in FP8 throughout inference lowers memory usage and speeds up computation.
```

> ### Supported devices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

| Device | Kernel | Notes |
|--------|--------|-------|
| Intel XPU | `torch._scaled_mm` | All XPU devices with FP8 support |
| NVIDIA CUDA (SM89+) | `torch._scaled_mm` | Ada Lovelace (L4, L40), Hopper (H100), Blackwell and newer |
| CPU / CUDA SM80 (A100) | Fallback | Dequantizes to BF16, uses standard matmul |

> ### Supported models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FP8 kernel path supports these quantization layouts.
```

- **Per-channel dynamic**: e.g. [RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic](https://huggingface.co/RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic)

> - **Per-tensor static**: e.g. [RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8](https://huggingface.co/RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8)

Reviewer: might be better to format these as a small table like (Strategy/Example model)

Author: done.

### Loading a pre-quantized FP8 model

> No extra configuration is needed — the FP8 kernel path is automatically activated when the model's config specifies FP8 quantization and a supported GPU is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transformers activates the FP8 kernel path automatically when the model's config specifies FP8 quantization and a supported GPU is available.
```

```python
import torch
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    "RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic",
    device_map="auto",

>     torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dtype=torch.bfloat16,
```

)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic")
inputs = tokenizer("Hello, how are you?", return_tensors="pt").to(model.device)
outputs = model.generate(**inputs, max_new_tokens=20)
print(tokenizer.decode(outputs[0], skip_special_tokens=True))
```

### Online FP8 quantization

> You can also quantize a BF16 model to FP8 on-the-fly during loading by passing a `CompressedTensorsConfig` with an FP8 quantization scheme. This does not require the `compressed-tensors` library.

Reviewer: hmm, it says it doesn't require the compressed-tensors library but then the code example below imports and uses it. should this sentence be updated or removed?

```suggestion
Quantize a BF16 model to FP8 during loading by passing a [`CompressedTensorsConfig`] with an FP8 quantization scheme. Online quantization doesn't require the `compressed-tensors` library.
```

```python
import torch
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, CompressedTensorsConfig
from compressed_tensors.quantization import QuantizationScheme, QuantizationArgs, QuantizationType, QuantizationStrategy

ct_config = CompressedTensorsConfig(
    config_groups={
        "group_0": QuantizationScheme(
            weights=QuantizationArgs(
                num_bits=8, type=QuantizationType.FLOAT, strategy=QuantizationStrategy.CHANNEL,
            ),
        ),
    },
    run_compressed=True,
)
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    "Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct",
    quantization_config=ct_config,
    device_map="auto",

>     torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dtype=torch.bfloat16,
```

The FP8 kernel path supports these quantization layouts.

| Strategy | Example model |
|----------|---------------|
| Per-channel dynamic | [RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic](https://huggingface.co/RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic) |
| Per-tensor static | [RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8](https://huggingface.co/RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8) |

### Loading a pre-quantized FP8 model

Transformers activates the FP8 kernel path automatically when the model's config specifies FP8 quantization and a supported GPU is available.

```python
import torch
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    "RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic",
    device_map="auto",
    dtype=torch.bfloat16,
)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8-dynamic")
inputs = tokenizer("Hello, how are you?", return_tensors="pt").to(model.device)
outputs = model.generate(**inputs, max_new_tokens=20)
print(tokenizer.decode(outputs[0], skip_special_tokens=True))
```

### Online FP8 quantization

> Quantize a BF16 model to FP8 during loading by passing a [`CompressedTensorsConfig`] with an FP8 quantization scheme. Online quantization doesn't require the `compressed-tensors` library.

Reviewer: should remove the last sentence since the code example below imports from the `compressed-tensors` library

```suggestion
Quantize a BF16 model to FP8 during loading by passing a [`CompressedTensorsConfig`] with an FP8 quantization scheme.
```
